---
title: World101x Anthropology of Current World Issues
published: 2014-08-09
tags: mooc
---

Notes from [World101x Anthropology][world101x] of Current World Issues, a MOOC on EdX.

[world101x]:http://world101x.org/

### Episode 1: Anthropology 101 I

#### What is Anthroplogy
* “Anthropology is telling other people's stories so that we can understand human difference.”
* “Anthropology is the modern science of human behavioral variation.”
* “It's an exploration of the paradox of human plurality.The fact is that all human beings are in some sense the same…The period of our cultural evolution is relatively small by contrast. The period in which we have become different culturally, ethnically in appearance is only a small part of our evolutionary history.”
* “The crucial thing is that anthropology has this insight it brings to understanding human society and human culture, which is that everyone lives within their logics, that we’re creatures of logic in some sense. Nothing is right or wrong. It just has a logic. Our duty, to put it that way, as anthropologists, is to uncover the logic of the people that we want to understand or the setting that we want to understand.”
* “One of the key points of anthropology, as they say, that context shapes behavior. Anthropologists, to understand what may seem exotic behaviors, understand the context in which people behave.”

#### Role of Anthropology
* “It ranges from kind of front-line activism through to people who see themselves as advocates for a particular group or very involved with some kind of NGO or community-based organization to people who feel like—well, their work by taking—looking at these things through a critical lens, by bringing questions of power and inequality and so forth to the forefront in thinking through questions that that itself is a kind of political move.”
* “The main legacy of anthropology is not necessarily changing the world but is ethnography. That's what we do. We have lots of different kinds of theories that we put forward. These come and go as time goes on. What was popular when I was a graduate student, French Structuralism, is no longer that much followed today. What stays is ethnography: telling people stories, describing people in their particular locale, describing how they live, how they talk, their conflicts, their passions, their lives.”
* “Anthropology is not innocent. We work with people—anthropologists work with people, study people often on the margins of society, often poor, vulnerable, right-less, indigenous, or in various ways oppressed or subordinated within larger social structures. From my point of view, from I think an engaged or an activist point of view, to just treat those people, those communities as laboratories and to take information out of them in order to produce academic knowledge is not a legitimate practice in the 21st century. By engaged or activist work, I mean an anthropology that doesn't just produce academic knowledge but tries to, in some way, positively impact the conditions that it is studying.”
* “I think one thing that anthropology can do now that’s invaluable is kind of counter this overwhelming emphasis on quantitative analysis of online media. People look for things like how often is a keyword repeated, how many users are on a particular site, but they don't look at what they're talking about. They don’t analyze the conversation. They take it out of its context. I mean, that’s what anthropology is about. They're basically doing the kind of armchair anthropology, these superficial analyses of culture that anthropologists have been working against for decades.”
* “I think what makes anthropology interesting and valuable both in a kind of operational military way and also from a broader strategic or policy perspective is that anthropologists, unlike political scientists, especially people who do international relations, are not focused on the state. They’re focused on the local conditions of the people who live in a particular place. It’s a different kind of perspective. It’s from a view from the ground up instead of a view from the top down.”
* “It allowed me to understand things both personally and socially. How I understand personal relationships is now social. That’s really a significant thing to realize, that it's not all about you. You’re part of a broader social body.”

### Episode 2: Anthropology 101 II

#### Interview w/ Ghassan Hage (about multiculturalism)
* “…in Australia, but also very much around the world, when I started thinking about multiculturalism, the dominant approach was based in political economy, in the political economy of migration, how working class – or to be working class, to become working class, people migrate from the Third World to Europe, to Australia, and become integrated into the society they migrate to. One of the things that always struck me is that there was not much an analysis of the experience of multiculturalism. There was a kind of like what you call an objectivist gaze, in the sense of the analysts think of themselves as sitting from way above the foray and looking at multiculturalism as if it was existing.”
* “My first work on multiculturalism started through this emphasis on the fact that a migrant might think that multiculturalism is a wonderful thing, that it’s given them an opportunity to feel better about their culture. At the same time, an Anglo person might be experiencing that same reality very differently and experiencing multiculturalism as a buzz that they get from having someone from another culture present in their space and they’re enjoying it.”
* “…if you look at the literature on multiculturalism in Australia, in US, in UK—not that much elsewhere — but in my experience, there’s a kind of policy fetishism in the sense if you think the government comes up with policy, and suddenly social reality becomes the policy as if the policy of government is so powerful that it molds reality completely. Of course, it contributes to those, but, again, the experience of a bureaucrat — the bureaucratic culture of multiculturalism is itself a cultural milieu that anthropologists have to insert themselves in to study. Likewise, white multiculturalism, the multiculturalism of certain specific ethnicities, because, again, it’s a big difference if you experience multiculturalism from the position of a minority culture, which is found as useful and enjoyable by the dominant culture and therefore is welcomed into the multicultural fold; and a minority which does not cope very nice and therefore nobody wants to be multicultural about them. Again, their experience of multiculturalism is very different.”
* “When you have this situation of a multiplicity of cultures, a multiplicity of forms of existence in the nation, then the question of territorial belonging becomes increasingly problematized. That's why it raises actually the imagination of the possibility of non-territorial nationalism and non-territorial belonging or the capacity of existing of two or three or four cultures belonging to the same space without this exclusionary mode of thinking.”
* “So, yes, the story shows how conditional the integration of a person can be when it is done in this mode. Even when it is super nice, when you leave that little bit of power left to the dominant culture whereby when the crunch comes and if it annoys them, they would use it. In a sense, the aim of any progressive multiculturalism is the removal of this residual power.”
* “Well, what I call the politics of negotiation which is here — because negotiation has many meanings. It’s very important to differentiate. Negotiation is not like negotiating over the table in a diplomatic way, but negotiating like when you negotiate a river and you are in a canoe. It’s about being attuned to others and being continuously sensitive, into sensitivity to the other in every possible way.”

### Episode 6: Living within limits
* _Well, I guess I would see all those modes of relationship that you've talked about as informed by ethical considerations or ethical struggle, by which I mean there's no pre-formulated way in which people can simply follow a script and relate to things or other people, particularly in situations of precariousness and scarcity as if that’s all you have to do. “Life Within Limits” as an ethical affair means that people are struggling to find a way around obstacles, a way of getting under or over something which is blocking their path. It involves a great deal of kind of inventiveness, which must, in a sense, pay respect to what is already codified as correct conduct, but must of necessity depart from it in some way. The way I understand this ethical struggle, as it were, to work out a modus vivendi for yourself and for others that are part of your kind of beloved community is very, very cognate with what Marcel Mauss called reciprocity because you’re always kind of saying, “What am I obliged to give? What can I rightfully expect to receive from the world? Insofar as I have received something, what do I have to give back?” I think this is something which connects with people in affluent and impoverished circumstances equally. These kind of considerations, it seems to me, are kind of universal and transcend circumstance. I think those are some of the issues that emerged out of the empirical fieldwork in Sierra Leone, but also have kind of come to me through work and thinking and a variety of other settings.  
…  
Insofar as we have internalized certain standards and notions of the good and the true and the right, there is a limit that our own conscience imposes. It's interesting that people in extremis will often, in a sense, transgress even those limits, even though they felt guilt stricken and profoundly remorseful and will often describe themselves as having descended into animality in order to survive. It seems to me that the evidence is that there's no limit that is not insurmountable or cannot be transgressed by human beings, even eating the bodies of other kind of members of your own species who have died in order to survive. There are some people who can't overcome even those limits, who will not do it, and who will prefer to die rather than transgress that._ – Michael Jackson, author of [Life Within Limits](http://www.amazon.com/Life-Within-Limits-Well-being-World/dp/0822349159)
